(cheerful intro music, whistling)
In this video we're gonna make a flexbox.
Now then I actually think that building
navigations is one of the most common and best use
cases for actually using flexbox.
So this is essentially what we're gonna be building here,
it's just a standard navigation.
So I've got a nav tag inside of that
I have an unordered list, and a whole bunch of list items.
The really only different thing being that these
social icons are gonna have a class of social on them
so that we can make them a little bit smaller.
So that's how it's going to look on desktop,
and when we go down to a bit of a smaller screen
I'm gonna make each one of them 50% wide,
but the social ones 25% wide, and then finally
when we get down to about 500 pixels we're going to stack
these ones while leaving these ones to be 25% wide.
Now, the kind of beauty of a Flex Nav is that you don't
need to go ahead and figure out the proportions.
A lot of times if you're doing this with floats you'd have
to figure out, "Okay there's 6 items plus 4 small ones, plus
however much padding or margin that you need to use, and
we'll figure it all out from there."
You don't have to do any math here,
and if you were to add one, so if I were to add a new item
to the list and refresh, you'll see that the new item just
slots itself perfectly in amongst the other ones.
We didn't have to do any resizing of widths
or do any sort of math.
Similarly if I go ahead and take out maybe lets say 2 of
these items and give it a refresh, it's extremely flexible.
You get the point, right?
You can just throw a whole bunch of elements at it,
tell them how much of the extra space they should eat up,
in this case it's a lot more than these ones,
and it'll all just figure it on out and you never have to
worry about adding up to 100% wide.
So, I'm gonna bring that back to item 3, and I'm
gonna go and swap this out just while the start is
what I'm gonna be working from.
Let's just take a quick look at the start of the
starting CSS that we've got here.
I've just got my HTML set up, my border box.
I've got some basic styling here.
Again, this stuff doesn't have anything to do with flexbox,
it's just so that the demo looks nice.
Wrapper, that has nothing to do so I just
kinda constrained the width of this navigation
so there's a wrapper around this.
And finally, here's where we're actually gonna get started.
We got the flex-nav, which is this nav thing here.
And then we've got a ul and and li.
So what is going to be the flex container?
It's not the flex-nav, it's gonna be the ul
that actually is the flex container and then
the li's are going to be the flex items in our case.
So we've gone ahead and selected that in the way we,
well let's first see where we're at actually.
This is kind of the default.
They all just stack vertically, right on top of each other.
We can go ahead and say display:flex and give that a save.
And you'll see that the items go from stacked on top
of each other to display:flex, which is,
they just take up the exact of room that they need.
There's a little bit of padding on them, but other
than that that's as much space.
So we've got all this extra space on the
right hand side here.
What are we going to do with it?
How are we going to work with it?
Let's actually just go ahead and select each
individual flex item, so I'm going to say flex-nav li,
because the li's are the flex items,
and we will say let's just try flex:1.
And from previous video we learned that if you
set something to flex:1 what does it do?
It sets the flex grow, which is: how is this
extra space allotted between all of the items?
As well as the flex shrink, when you don't have
enough space for all the items, how do you mix it,
or how do you divide it on up?
So, set a flex:1, refresh, and what have we got here?
Looks like all of 'em have the exact same space.
So that doesn't work extremely well because these
social icons right here, they don't really need that
much space, and these items here, they probably do need
that amount of space because they are a little bit
longer in the text that they have.
So what we wanna do is select the individual ones,
which we say flex-nav.social and the reason I'm doing that,
if we look at the index HTML, we've got these list items
with the class social on it, and we're gonna make those ones
a little bit different than the other ones.
So there I'm actually gonna set these ones to flex:1 and
I'm gonna go up to this regular one and set them to flex:3.
The reason I'm gonna do that, because I want the
regular flex, I want these flex items to take 3 times
the amount of the extra space as the social ones,
because really they don't need any of the extra space so
I'm gonna say, "You take 3 times the amount of the social."
It's worth noting that this flex:3 is applying to
all of them, and then is .social is going to overwrite
it for these 4 social icons.
So give that a refresh, and you'll see that right
away we've got these ones being a little bit smaller
and then these ones off to races.
So that's it, that's 1, 2, 3 lines of CSS to get
yourself a really nice flexbox nav.
It's a hell of a lot easier than using something like
floats and using your percentages to figure out
how much space they should take up.
Now we wanna talk about mobile.
We want it to, we kinda have 2 stages here.
As soon as we hit 1000 pixels I want them to stack 2 in
a row, and then I wanna put these 4 all along the bottom.
So what we need to go ahead first to do is if we want
them to, see if we go really really small here,
they're just gonna run into each other.
So what do we actually need for that to work is wrapping.
We need to turn on wrapping.
You might think, "Oh we need to change it from row
to column," and that's a pretty good hypothesis,
we could go ahead and say flex-nav ul,
flex-direction:column, and give it a refresh.
When we hit that 1000 pixel breakpoint,
let's see what goes on here.
See they just stack vertically and in many situations
that would actually be totally acceptable, but the
problem is that we don't want them to go just stacked
just yet, or maybe not at all.
We want 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6 and then when we get down to
the social icons, we want 4 of them to be.
So we actually need to keep it in row, which is the default,
so we're not gonna put that there.
What we actually want to turn on is the flex-wrap.
So we'll say flex-wrap:wrap, and refresh.
Now we'll hit that 1000 pixel breakpoint.
And, nothing's happening.
How come they aren't wrapping?
And for something to be able to wrap, we actually
need to give it some sort of width.
And the way that we are going to do that
is with the flex basis property.
So we'll go ahead and select each of our items, we'll say
flex-nav li and I'm just going to do them all right now,
and then we'll go and fix the social ones in a second.
So we'll say flex-nav and flex, we're going to use
the shorthand property because we want them to grow at 1,
we want it to evenly take the extra space.
We want it to shrink at 1, we want them to divi up,
or we want to chisel off the extra space evenly.
And then we wanna set it to 50%, because we want them
to be 50% wide right next to each other.
So go ahead and give that a save, refresh, let's
hit that 1000 pixel breakpoint.
And perfect, look what we got going on here.
1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6 and then, what's going on here?
This is kind of, pretty classic of flexbox, is that when
something goes wrong, when you have like conflicting
properties, it all just kind of pukes it up onto the screen.
But the reason that is there is because we still have
the social one probably overwriting it, and the
way that we can sort of debug that is if you open up your
dev tools and just inspect one of them,
I'll bring this down to the bottom here.
I'm just gonna click on one of the social ones.
You'll see that this is our flex property that we just
wrote inside of the media query 1 1 50%.
However this flex:1 is overwriting it.
And that means that there is no flex basis
actually being applied.
So we need to specify a flex basis on that one, so I'll
just say flex-nav li, or even just .social will be enough.
You never want to over qualify your selectors too much
otherwise you're gonna run into issues down the road.
We'll say flex:1 1 and 25%, what that will give us now is
nicely spaced out different icons,
so that can kinda go on down.
The last thing we wanna do is once we hit the, let's say
500 pixel breakpoint, and I know this can be any
breakpoint that you want, but we just then want to
change this flex basis one more time and to be
able to stack just one by one by one.
So we say .flex-nav li inside of there.
I don't have to say flex:1 1 100%, just because
we've done that already.
We can just say flex-basis right altogether and say 100%.
And that's just going to overwrite this part and
the flex grow and the flex shrink of the previous
one is going to stick around.
So give that a save, refresh.
Now go down, down to 2, and then we hit that
500 pixel breakpoint and they'll stack.
These ones are small enough that they can stay
4 to a row as long as we want.
So that's a very simple flexbox nav, definitely
really nice and easy.
In the next video what we're gonna do is we're gonna
be looking at how do you write a little toggle nav that
will toggle that up and down as well as how do we
order different elements on our page differently
than they're on mobile vs something like desktop.
I'll see you in that video.
Thanks a lot.